I will begin this video with an example to show you the problem that initialization will solve.
So for I in range ten.
So I'm just going to create a for loop.
Here are of.
So the ith element in R is I squared.
And then let's print out r.
So what are we doing in this for loop.
So we are looping over the numbers the integers from zero through nine.
And I want to create a new list where each element in this list is defined by I squared.
Really straightforward.
But when I run this we get a problem.
And the problem is that R is not defined.
So I haven't yet defined this variable for R.
So essentially what's going on here is we are trying to access an element of a list that does not exist.
So I'm saying you know, please give me access to the zeroth element or the first element in this list
R and Python says what list are?
There is no list R.
Okay, so what we need to do here is initialize this variable R okay.
Now I'm going to do this in numpy because uh well you often need to initialize in numpy.
And numpy also provides a bunch of useful ways to initialize variables.
So import numpy as NP.
And as I mentioned in a previous video, when you're coding for real, it's actually good to have all
of these library imports be all the way at the top of the script, and not just whenever you need them
as you're going along.
But this is just a little tutorial.
You can see I haven't even named this file yet.
Okay, so, uh, let me do this.
So r equals numpy dot zeros ten.
Okay.
And then I'm going to print out r.
So r is an array.
It's a numpy array.
And it's just ten zeros in a row.
Now I will Copy and paste this code again.
And now let's try running this code again.
Okay.
And now we get no errors, no warnings, and we get exactly the desired outcome here.
All right.
So what would happen if we do.
Let's say I'll initialize this to be 13 zeros.
And now here I have a range up to ten.
What do you think is going to be the value of R.
Or what do you think is going to happen.
Maybe we're going to get an error message.
Let's see what happens.
Okay.
So what happens is this for loop only went up to ten numbers.
So the up to a value of nine.
And then afterwards we have zeros because that's how I initialize the variable r okay.
Now let's try the other way I'm going to initialize this to ten.
And here this is going to go up to 13.
Now what do you think is going to happen here.
Feel free to pause the video and make a guess.
Let's run it and find out okay.
We get an error message.
And what is the error message?
The error message is index ten is out of bounds for x is zero.
Don't worry about this.
But size ten.
So basically here we have a kind of similar problem to what we encountered in the beginning of this
video.
But here the variable r actually does exist.
But we are trying to access an element that is longer than the list itself, or then the numpy array.
So we can still look at what r is equal to.
And this part is all correct.
You know this is I squared.
But now we are trying to access the 11th element.
But there's only ten elements in there.
So we get an error message okay.
So I think this looks ugly.
Let me see.
Oh we can soft code this.
Let's do a array size equals 12.
And now I can use this as a variable.
I'm going to copy and paste this into here.
And this is a good example of soft coding because now I only need to change this variable, this number
here, and that will automatically update all of the other relevant variables here.
So I can change this to 12.
I can change this to 15.
And I don't need to worry about changing this number 15 multiple times.
So here we initialize this variable using zeros.
And now I'm going to show you another option for initializing variables in Python.
So we can use the function full.
And here I will write ten.
Actually let me write array size.
So this is still soft coded.
And now I'll write zero okay.
So here we get zeros and you can count them.
There's going to be 15 of them okay.
And now let's say we want to initialize this to one.
So we can initialize it to tens.
We can initialize it to I don't know -99.
We can initialize it to n a numpy dot n a n nan stands for not a number.
This is a mathematical value that is used in place of dividing by zero.
So having an expression like zero divided by zero that produces Nan Nans are sometimes used in applied
mathematics when coding math in Python when you want to ignore particular values.
Let's say you need to filter out certain values because they are particularly noisy, or because they
are irrelevant, or they're related to processing some other condition, and so you want to remove them
from the data set or the data array.
And replacing the numbers with Nans is one way to do that.
Okay.
So here are two common ways to initialize a variable before you start populating a variable using a
for loop.
So numpy dot zeros and numpy dot full.
These are all vectors that I've shown you so far.
We can also initialize matrices.
So here I have.
This is going to give me.
Oops it's zeros.
This is going to give me an array of four zeros.
But let's say we want a 4x4 matrix of zeros.
You might think of doing something like this.
That seems sensible.
Unfortunately that's not quite the correct syntax because here numpy is expecting the second input to
be the data type.
So for example if these would be integers or floating point numbers.
So what we need to do is actually provide a tuple as the first input into numpy dot zeros.
So here I still have 4x4.
This is the size of the matrix that we are initializing as zeros.
But I'm just surrounding these in parentheses.
Okay.
So this is actually just the first input in here.
And then yeah if we wanted these to be integers I could write dtype equals int.
And now we get ints.
Now these are still zeros just like these are zeros.
But notice that these zeros all have decimal points on them.
So these are floating point numbers and these are just integers.
So here is a question.
Do we always need to initialize variables.
The answer is no.
You don't always need to.
And I've shown you several examples of appending lists so that they continue growing inside of a for
loop.
So here's a simple example.
So here I'm initializing this list are actually let me copy this from here.
So let's go back here.
So now I'm initializing R to be an empty list.
And now I will write r dot append like this.
And so now this works.
So now this variable R starts off as an empty list.
And then here we just get the length of the list as one.
And then the length of the list is two.
And in fact we can write this out print the length of r.
So now we see that at every iteration.
In this for loop R is actually growing in size.
I can show you that as well.
So this looks nice.
It's like a ski slope or something.
So you can see that the length of R is increasing as we go throughout this for loop versus.
If I would initialize this to be zeros then we can say oh wait then this needs to be different.
So now this goes back to indexing equals I squared.
And now you can see here it's all zeros.
Here it's zero one.
And then zeros 014 and then all zeros and so on.
And so the zeros are decreasing.
But the size of the array is the same at each iteration.
So this is a method for.
Let me just go back like this here.
This is a method for appending uh lists.
And we can also do something similar with numpy arrays.
So we have to initialize this to be a numpy array.
So now this is.
This is a list in here.
This is an empty list.
And then I'm converting this into a data type numpy array.
Okay.
And now the formulation is slightly different in numpy.
So r equals numpy dot append.
And here we provide two inputs.
The first input is the variable that we want to append.
And then the second input is the information that we want to put at the end of the of this list or this
array.
Okay.
So now we see that this array starts off as being empty here.
And then what's printed out is actually when I equals zero.
So the first iteration of this for loop.
Now this loop is getting longer and longer.
Okay.
So conclusions from this video.
Uh, you can initialize variables, especially in numpy.
Uh, you do not always need to initialize variables because you can allow variables to grow in size
inside a for loop.
Nonetheless, initialization using this kind of approach either with numpy or numpy dot zeros.
This is much better than letting your arrays grow inside for loops.
It's better for memory reasons.
This is more memory intensive than this approach.
It's better for computation time reason because this is faster than growing an array.
So especially if you have large arrays, this is going to take really long time.
And it's also better just for you to think about your code.
Because if you can already plan in advance how big your arrays and matrices need to be, that means
that you are thinking critically about what's going on in your code, and that is always a good idea.
Nonetheless, appending is also sometimes useful.